# Attainable Concordance Signature on Swiss Market Index

Under the supervision of Prof. Johanna Nešlehová, I conducted an undergraduate research project motivated by [McNeil et al., 2020](#mcneil2020) on attainable concordance signatures: the collection of concordance probabilities over the power set that characterizes multivariate dependence beyond pairwise measures. I proposed an applied study using the Swiss Market Index (SMI), which contains 20 constituents with two lack complete histories, making the attainable-set framework directly relevant.

---------------------------------------------------------

## Project Goal

The project aimed to answer the following questions:

- How can we study multivariate dependence when some components' data are not available?
- What does the attainable set of concordance signatures look like on Swiss Market Index?
- How can we reduce dimensionality when the computation of concordance signatures scales exponentially with dimension?

------------------------------

## Data

The dataset consists of the **adjusted daily prices of the 20 SMI component stocks in 2020**, downloaded from Yahoo Finance. After cleaning:

- 18 stocks had nearly complete histories. 
- PGHN had only a partial history, as it was newly added to the index after September 18, 2020
- ALC was treated as fully missing, since its price series was quoted in a different currency unit from the other stocks

To remove volatility-driven serial effects before dependence analysis, I first transformed prices into **log returns** and then fitted a **GARCH(1,1)** model to each marginal series using either **Gaussian** or **scaled-t innovations**.

Model adequacy was checked using:

- **auto-correlograms** of absolute residuals
- **Portmanteau tests** of strict white noise
- **QQ plots** and **histograms** for residuals to check Gaussian or scaled-t innovations

The resulting standardized residuals were treated as approximately **i.i.d.** and suitable for dependence analysis under an **elliptical distribution** framework.

------------------------------------------------------

## Methodology

For a set of variables $\mathcal{D}$, the **concordance signature** is the collection of the probabilities of concordance over subsets of $\mathcal{D}$. By [McNeil et al., 2020](#mcneil2020), odd-order coordinates can be derived from even-order ones, so the concordance signature is determined by the **probabilities of concordance of even subsets**. While given the partial concordance signaure on a set $\mathcal{D}$, only some values of the remaining concordance signatureis attainable, and this attainable set forms a **convex hull** generated by extremal mixture copulas.

Using this framework, I analyzed the dependence on SMI: even though we could not estimate the full concordance signature due to incompleteness of PGHN and ALC, we could study the **attainable concordance signature**, given the partial concordance signature of the subset of stocks with completed histories. Note that **the partial concordance signature is estimated using the multivariate Kendall's tau**, via the methodology introduced in [McNeil et al., 2020](#mcneil2020). 

--------------------------------------------------------

## Empirical Results

The computation of attainable concordance signature is done via R package [`KendallSignature`](https://github.com/ajmcneil/KendallSignature). Since this package always calculates the full set of concordance signature, which scales as $O(2^d)$, computation time was a major obstacle in this study. I tried several approaches to reduce computation:

- clustering the stocks into PEA clusters
- setting higher-order concordance terms to zero
- starting with a small subset then generalizing the result to a higher dimension

### Dimension reduction via PEA clustering

The first approach I tried was to reduce the dimension by partitioning the stocks into clusters that statisfy the **Partial Exchangeability Assumption (PEA)**, so that any stock from a cluster can be used to represent the entire cluster in the study of dependence. I re-created the clustering algorithm of [Perreault et al., 2019](#Perreault2019) in R to search for the optimal partition that would create the least number of clusters while still not reject PEA, and **reduced the 18-stock panel to 13 clusters, resulting in a 15-dimensional problem (13 clusters + PGHN + ALC)**. However, 15 was still too expensive to compute directly, so I had to consider other approaches.

Note that a useful practical observation from this step was that industry groupings often contain several PEA-based clusters, but they rarely split a PEA-based cluster, meaning that **industry labels could provide a strong initialization for the clustering search**.

### Attainability of higher-order independence 

Another approach I tried to reduce computation was to **set the probabilities of concordance to be zero for all subsets with cardinality larger than 2** (i.e. assume higher-order independence, which is a commonly used simplification in practice). However, I had to verify it's attainability first. 

I chose several subsets with small cardinality of stocks with completed histories from SMI to apply the attainability check. I first estimated the even concordance signature using the data directlt, then set $\kappa_I = 0$ for every $|I| > 2$, and checked its attainability via the `attainable()` function in [`KendallSignature`](https://github.com/ajmcneil/KendallSignature). Unfortunately, after applying the verifying process on several subsets, I concluded that higher-order independence was in general not attainable in this case.

### Attainable concordance signature on SMI

I started with a small set of cardinality 4: $\mathcal{D} = \{UBSG, LHN, LONN, PGHN\}$, estimated the set of attainable concordance signature given the partial concordance signature on subset $\{UBSG, LHN, LONN\}$, and plotted the set. Then, I repreated this experiment by adding more stocks into $\mathcal{D}$. I focused on a lower projection of the attainable set as it is easier to visualize, and discovered that the lower projection remains the same as more stocks were added. For example, the set of attainable pairwise concordance forms a rectangle on the 2-D projection of cordinates PGHN-UBSG and PGHN-LHN, and this rectangle remains the same when adding more stocks to the given partial concordance signature.

I also estimated the full concordance signature on set $\mathcal{D}$ using the common observation window shared by all stocks (i.e. data after September 18, 2020), and verified that above attainable concordance signarure captures this estimated. 

----------------------------------------------

## Limitations

This project was mainly limited by two factors.

First, a more fundamental solution to the computational obstacle would be modifying the R package `KendallSignature` to allow computing only the **partial attainable concordance signature** relevant to the target coordinates. Due to time constraints, I was not able to fully study and refactor the package codebase, therefore used above practical approaches. 

Second, I empirically found that lower-dimensional projections of the attainable set appeared unchanged as additional stocks were added, but did not have the opportunity to establish it mathematically.

------------------------------------------------------------------

## Repository Contents

```text
.
├── code/               # Sample R code for data preprocessing, dimension reduction, and attainability analysis
├── report/             # final written report
└── README.md
```

--------------------------------------------------

## References

<a id="mcneil2020"></a>
**McNeil, A., Nešlehová, J., & Smith, A. (2020).**  
On attainability of Kendall’s tau matrices and concordance signatures.

<a id="Perreault2019"></a>
**Perreault, S., Duchesne, T., & Nešlehová, J. G. (2019).**  
Detection of block-exchangeable structure in large-scale correlation matrices.
